29 August 1996

		The Summer of t3 and Multi-Word Constructions 

I. Multi-word Prepositions

	I began the summer with the task of completing the multi-word
preposition project.  I focused on testing and correcting the many trees that
had been constructed at the end of last summer, but that had not been
successfully implemented at that time.  Along the way, several unforseen
problems arose, and I was forced to make several changes and construct a few
additional trees.  

A. Additions to Prepositions.trees

	The following trees were added to the grammar under prepositions.trees:

	(1)	B_nxARBPnx, B_vxARBPnx, B_ARBPnxs, B_nxAPnx, B_vxAPnx, B_APnxs,
		B_vxCONJPnx, B_CONJPnxs, B_nxPPnx, B_vxPPnx, B_PPnxs, B_vxNPnx,
		B_NPnxs, B_nxPNPnx, B_vxPNPnx, B_PNPnxs, B_PDNPnxs, B_nxPDNPnx,
		B_vxPDNPnx, B_nxPNaPnx, B_vxPnaPnx, B_PNaPnxs

The upper case portions of the tree names signify the anchors.  The two-word
preposition cases are straightforward; both components of the preposition are
designated as anchors, retaining the name of their ordinary function (note: In
the past, only one other multi-word constituent type had been added into the
grammar.  These were multi-word conjunctions, where neither of the components
of the conjunction were actually conjunctions themselves.  Therefore, they were
called UCONJ, for unanalyzed conjunction, so the constituents' part of speech
do not appear in those tree names.  However, every multi-word preposition
contains at least one preposition, thus the ordinary part of speech for the
components appear in the tree names.)  
	
	In all of the multi-word preposition trees, the anchors are immediately
dominated by a P node.  The three-word preposition trees containing the 
sequence 'PNaP' do not permit internal modification of the noun constituent of
the preposition. The 'a' signifies that the noun node is marked for null 
adjunction.  The trees that contain the sequence 'PDNP' are four-anchor 
preposition sequences, where the internal noun is modified by a determiner.  
However, the particular determiner that modifies the internal noun is frozen 
in all cases.  Thus, the determiner is also an anchor of the preposition.  The
trees that countain the sequence 'PNP' allow for internal modification of the 
noun.  These trees are chosen by preposition sequences such as 'in need of', 
where the noun 'need' can be sensibly modified by adjectives such as 
'desparate'.  I have noted in the past that the set of adjectives that can 
modify the internal nouns in these prepositions seems to be limited to 
adjectives of a 'drastic' or 'intensifying' nature.  However, since we only 
handle syntactic behavior within the system, the adjectives that can adjoin to
the internal noun are not restricted.  The following is a list (not necessarily
complete) of these adjectives:

	(2)	strict, direct, dire, desparate, undying, utmost, loving,
		valiant, insufferable

	Neither the 'PDNP' nor the 'PNP' trees have been successfully tested,
although the trees listed in (1) have been added to the grammar.  Currently,
there is a spanning heuristic in the XTAG system that prevents the testing of
these forms.  For example, the 'PDNP' items are indexed on the noun in the
sequence; however, the heuristic requires the object of the preposition within
a certain span of words.  This has been shown to be the only current obstacle
to using these trees; when we purposefully sidetracked the heuristic, the trees
worked fine.  Once a solution for this problem is reached, both of these sets
of trees should pose no problem.  The 'PNP' trees have been shown to work
without adjective modification.  There is a distinct possibility that some
other obstacle exists (aside from the spanning heuristic) for the modification
of the noun anchor by an adjective.  One also might want to consider that the
preposition sequences that CAN be internally modified may not rightfully form a
constituent, and thus should not be handled in like manner to the other
multi-word prepositions.  However, if one attempts to show that the preposition
can be broken up into meaningful constituents, one fails miserably.  The
standard tests for constituency (such as It-clefts) do not seem to apply here
since the aforementioned prepositions do not seem to be grammatical in an
It-cleft construction.  Thus, I have left open the question of whether or not 
these prepositions should rightfully be treated as multi-word constituents,
although there is good motivation in Quirk (1985) for treating these
prepositions as single constituents.

B. Additions to lex.trees

	Toward the completion of the multi-word preposition project, it came to
my attention that some of these prepositions could be used as arguments of
verbs.  For example, witness the sentence in (3).

	(3)	He put the large snake right in front of me.

Thus, I had to construct argument trees for some of the multi-word
prepositions.  The trees in (4) were added to lex.trees.

	(4)	A_PXAPnx, A_PXARBPnx, A_PXPPnx, A_PXPNaPnx

The corresponding trees for the PDNP and PNP prepositions now reside at the
pathname in (5).  Once the aforementioned spanning heuristic problem is
remedied, these trees can then be added to the grammar.

	(5)	/mnt/linc/xtag/work/heather/prep/prep-to-be-completed/
		lex-add.trees
		
C. New Tree Families
	
	Several (million) tree families have been successfully tested and added
to the grammar for the multi-word prepositions.  The major family categories 
are predicative prepositions with noun phrase subjects and predicative 
prepositions with sentential subjects.  The characteristics of the given types
of prepositions described above carry over into the treatment of the 
prepositions in the tree families.  The following tree families have been added
to the grammar:

	(6)	Tnx0APnx1, Tnx0ARBPnx1, Tnx0CONJPnx1, Tnx0NPnx1, Tnx0PPnx1,
		Tnx0PNaPnx1, Ts0APnx1, Ts0ARBPnx1, Ts0CONJPnx1, Ts0NPnx1, 
		Ts0PPnx1, Ts0PNaPnx1

The tree families for the PDNP and PNP prepositions are located at the address
in (7).
	
	(7)	/mnt/linc/xtag/work/heather/prep/prep-to-be-completed/

		Tnx0PDNPnx1.trees, Ts0PDNPnx1.trees, Tnx0PNPnx1.trees,
		Ts0PNPnx1.trees

	Only one problem remains with these families.  Toward the end of the
summer, we noticed that a tree for extraction of the object of the preposition
was missing from not only all of my tree families, but also from the already
instantiated tree family Tnx0Pnx1.trees.  I attempted to remedy this absence,
but I am currently having difficulties getting any of the new trees to work.
We have performed extensive testing of the A_W1nx0Pnx1 tree.  Christy
successfully built a tree by hand, having had no problems with the unification
of features.  Thus, we have narrowed the problem down to something associated
with the parser.  These trees have not been entered into the grammar at this
point, and they currently reside at the following address under their
respective tree family names:

	(8)	/mnt/linc/xtag/work/heather/prep/prep-to-be-completed/

D. What Remains 

	All of the material described above has been added to the tech report.
The only sections missing are the tree family descriptions for the PDNP and PNP
tree families.  These documents have been prepared and are located at the
address in (9).

	(9)	/mnt/linc/xtag/work/heather/prep/tech-rpt/LaTex/

		Tnx0PDNPnx1.tex, Tnx0PNPnx1.tex, Ts0PDNPnx1.tex, Ts0PNPnx1.tex

There are several examples of the many constructions with multi-word
prepositions in the comments of the different trees.  

	The following is a summary of the small tasks left to perform to
successfully complete the implementation of the multi-word prepositions:

	(10)	a.	Fix the span heuristic problem
		b.	Test the following trees and tree families: nxPDNPnx,
			vxPDNPnx, PDNPnxs, nxPNPnx, vxPNPnx, PNPnxs, PXPDNPnx,
			PXPNPnx, Tnx0PDNPnx1.trees, Tnx0PNPnx1.trees, 
			Ts0PDNPnx1.trees, Ts0PNPnx1.trees ((5) & (7))
		c.	Add the trees and families in b. to the grammar
		d.	Add the tech report documents for the tree families in
			b. to the tech report ((9))
		e.	Test the extraction of PP object trees for all the
			multi-word preposition families, in addition to the
			tree for the Tnx0Pnx1.trees family ((8))
		f.	Add these trees to the grammar in their respective
			tree families 

II.  Multi-Word Adverbs

A.  'at least', 'at most' & 'up to'

	During the course of the clean-up of the Wall Street Journal corpus,
we ran across several instances of the two-word sequence 'at least'.  It came
to my attention that this might possibly be a multi-word constituent.  In
consultation with the whole team, we decided that 'at least' should be analyzed
as a multi-word adverb.  Considering the fact that 'at' retains absolutely none
of its preposition properties, it seems reasonable to analyze the sequence as a
single constituent.  We decided that it should be a focus adverb because it 
behaves similarly to the other focus adverbs 'even' and 'only'.  For example,
'even' and 'only' can adjoin to practically any constituent, and the same is 
true for 'at least'.  The following trees have been added to the grammar in 
the advs-adjs.trees file:

	(11)	PARBd, PARBnx, PARBs, PARBarb, PARBvx, vxPARB

'at least' selects all of the trees listed in (11), while 'at most' and 'up to'
only select the tree that modifies a determiner (PARBd).  The determiner-
modifying adverbs are restricted to adjoining to +cardinal determiners,
while the noun phrase modifying adverbs are restricted to adjoing to -cardinal
noun phrases.  We decided that when the noun phrase contains a cardinal 
determiner, the adverb in fact modifies the determiner (Keenan and Stavi, 1986,
list 'at least n' and 'at most n' as determiners in their laundry lists of 
determiners).  However, in all other cases, the adverb modifies the whole noun
phrase.  The other trees in (11) are not restricted in their adjunction.  

	The sentence in (12) is an example of a problem raised by Christy in
her exploration of determiner conjunction:

	(12)	Many, or at least some, people came to the party.

On one reading, 'at least' is modifying the non-cardinal determiner 'some',
which can not be handled by the current implementation.  One might also suggest
that there is some sort of ellipsis occuring, and that our system may be right
in parsing the NP in (12) as a conjunction of the NPs 'many' and 'at least some
people'.  In a sentence like (13), one can readily see that 'at least' is
behaving as a focus particle, offering three possible interpretations ('at
least' adjoined to the determiner, noun phrase, or sentence).  Thus, it seems
that the distinction between the three interpretations is ripe material for the
semantics to handle.

	(13)	At least some people came.

We have decided to forgo solving the problem in (12) by allowing it to
parse as a conjunction of NPs, and also we have decided to allow only the noun
phrase and sentential modifying readings of (13).  The two main motivations
for not allowing 'at least' to adjoin to non-cardinal determiners are the
multiple derivations that will result every time it modifies at the NP or 
sub-NP level, as well as the fact that the most common usage of 'at least'
is in modifying cardinal determiners.  It is conceivable that there are
determiners that are not listed as pronouns in the grammar that will appear in
sentences like (12), and so these examples will fail.  At this point, we are 
not inclined to suffer multiple derivations for the common uses of 'at 
least' for very infrequent usages such as those in (12).  I must also note that
it seems that 'some' is peculiar as a determiner because it is the only
non-cardinal determiner that permits modification by adverbs. 

	It was also decided that phrases such as 'at the least' or 'at the very
least' should still be handled as a preposition with a noun phrase object.
These phrases are always used as sentential-level modifiers, and thus
may be providing a glimpse of the development of this phrase into its current
broad usage as the focus particle 'at least'.  It is fairly clear that 
although these phrases ('at the least' and 'at least') are no doubt related, 
giving them different analyses is not an unwise decision.  In the case of 'at 
the least', the preposition characteristics of 'at' are still recognizable, 
which is not the case with 'at least'.  Additionally, as I mentioned above, 'at
least' is a focus particle, while 'at the least' can only modify at the
sentential level.

	I have added material describing the treatment of 'at least', `up to' 
and 'at most', along with a description of the treatment of other focus adverbs
(even, only, etc) to the tech report.  In the process of adding this material 
to the tech report, I ended up making a few changes to the treatment of the 
focus adverbs.  I changed the entries for 'only', 'even', and 'just' so that 
they can modify cardinal determiners and non-cardinal noun phrases.  
Previously, they were not allowed to modify determiners, and they were allowed 
to modify at the noun level.  The only remaining task for this project is to 
test the 'at most' and 'up to' entries.  All of the trees that have been added
for 'at least' have been successfully tested.  Due to a current problem with 
the system, I am unable to successfully parse sentences with 'at most' since 
a morphology change was made in order to allow this entry to work.

B. As-As Constructions

	Another problem came into focus during the cleaning of the Wall Street
Journal Corpus.   Srini noticed the frequency of as-as constructions, where
constituents ranging from adverbs to adjectives to determiners could be found
between the two instances of 'as'.  These phrases are comparative-like in
nature, although their uses are quite varied.  The examples listed in (14)
display the different observed behavior for these as-as constructions.  

	(14)	a.	Function: Adverb modifying cardinal determiner
			Index:    Adjective
			EX:       A pact with GM may emerge in as little as
				  two weeks.
		
		b.	Function: Adverb modifying cardinal determiner
			Index:    Determiner
			EX:       As many as two hundered people came.

		c.	Function: Predicative
			Index:	  Adjective
			EX:	  A lot of taxpayers out there aren't as 
				  paranoid as one might think.
		
		d.	Function: Modifies VP
			Index:	  Adverb
			EX:	  Major shippers say they expect freight rates
				  to rise at least as fast as inflation.
		
		e.	Function: Conjunction (PP, NP, VP, S, AP, ARB, A)
			Index:	  Adverb (namely, 'well')
			EX:	  Dogs, as well as cats, make good pets.
		
		f.	Function: Preposition
			Index:	  Adverb
			EX:	  As recently as Tuesday, we were not close to
				  being finished the project.

B.1.  as-as constructions modifying cardinal determiners

	The behavior in (14a) and (14b) has been handled by creating the 
following trees:

	(15)	B_CONJaCONJd and B_CONJDCONJd  

Both of these trees are restricted to adjoining to cardinal determiners.  Since
its behavior is similar to the two-word adverbs that modify cardinal
determiners, it was decided that the behavior displayed by the as-as
construction in (14a) and (14b) is that of an adverb.  The first tree handles 
the cases where an adjective substitutes in between the two occurrences of 
'as'.  The types of adjectives that can substitute there have not been 
restricted in any way, although it seems clear that only adjectives of size or
amount are appropriate.  The second tree handles the phrases 'as many as' and 
'as much as' when they are use to modify cardinal determiners.  It was decided
that 'many' and 'much' are determiners.  Since not just any determiner can be 
a part of this kind of construction, the determiner node was deemed an anchor 
of the tree.  In both trees, both of the occurences of 'as' are anchors.  These
trees have been thoroughly tested, and descriptions have been added to the 
tech report in the modifiers section on adverbs.  

B.2.  as-as constructions as conjunctions - 'as well as'

	The behavior displayed in (14d) has also been handled.  I have created
the following trees listed in (16), and these trees now reside at the address
in (17).  

	(16)	B_nx1CONJARBCONJnx2, B_a1CONJARBCONJa2, B_px1CONJARBCONJpx2,
		B_arb1CONJARBCONJarb2, B_p1CONJARBCONJp2, B_ax1CONJARBCONJax2

	(17)	/mnt/linc/xtag/work/heather/as-as/as-as.trees

Examples displaying each of these uses are listed in the comments section of
these trees.  The only entry that chooses these trees is 'as well as', which
seems to display behavior very similar to 'and'.  Presumably, there should also
be a tree for VP conjunction (ex. That could widen the yield spread between
Treasurys and asset-backed securities, as well as make it tougher to unload
the latter), but this tree has not yet been created.  We are still awaiting the
results of Anoop's work on VP conjunction.  Multi-word conjunction trees to
handle sentential level conjunction were created previously by Christy.  At
the sentential level of conjunction, several different adverbs other than 
'well' can substitute between the two occurences of 'as'.

	Most of the trees in (16) have been successfully tested; the only trees
that remain to succeed are B_ax1CONJARBCONJax2 and B_arb1CONJARBCONJarb2.  The
material describing these trees has not been added to the tech report since the
trees have not yet been added to the grammar.  

B.3.  as-as constructions as preposition - `as well as' and `as recently as'

	I have also constructed trees to handle the example listed in (14e).
Although it seems that 'as recently as' most often takes a time NP complement,
Christy pointed out that as long as the NP makes reference to some time span,
then it can work with 'as recently as'.  Note the example in (18) below.

	(18)	As recently as Reagan, our economy has been stuck in an 
		economic downturn.

The following trees have been created to handle the expressions 'as well as'
and 'as recently as' when they behave as prepositions:

	(19)	B_PARBPnxs, B_vxPARBPnx

Both of the occurences of 'as' and the adverb are designated anchors, since 
'recently' and 'well' seem to be the only adverbs that occur between the
two occurences of 'as' and, as a part of this construction, act as a
preposition.  (However, it has come to my attention that 'early' works equally
well in this position.  Because of the tenuous nature of the system at this 
point, I am choosing not to add 'as early as' to the prepositions.text file.  
Hopefully, whoever comes across this note will add this entry.) These trees 
have not yet been tested, and also no material has been added to the tech 
report.  Most likely, it will not be necessary to add material on these trees 
to the tech report, since there is already a brief note about multi-word 
prepositions.

B.4.  Ellipsis problems with the as-as constructions

	Sentences (14c) and (14d) are examples of ellipsis using the as-as
constructions.  There are many different types of ellipsis constructions using
the as-as sequence; I have begun an attempt to make sense of these
constructions.  In (20), I list several different examples of ellipsis
constructions.  

	(20)	a.  Our team is as good as their team.  
		b.  His report is not as outlandish as I thought.
		c.  Major shippers say they expect freight rates to rise at
		    least as fast as inflation.
		d.  The system was developing as rapidly as they had hoped.
		e.  We will perform the task as soon as possible.
		f.  They were paying as many claims as it could right on the
		    spot.
		g.  While not as brand loyal as in the past, consumers today
		    don't buy products capriciously, either.
		h.  Voyager's photos will be as clear as Galileo's.

It seems that basic sentences like (20a), (20b), (20c), and (20d) might be able
to be handled by the system at some point.  I will begin with a thorough 
explanation of what I have come across thus far about these constructions, and 
then I will outline a few preliminary plans for a solution.  

	In sentences like (20a), an adjectival as-as construction is used to
relate two NPs in terms of the property described by the adjective within the
as-as construction.  It is likely that (20a) is a shortened version of the
following sentence in (21):
	
	(21)  Our team is good, as their team is good.

A tree for this sentence appears on the attached page.  I must say that my
knowledge is limiting my ability to describe what I am trying to communicate at
this point.  I apologize if the wording and the technical aspects of the syntax
are crude.  Deciding how to move from the sentence in (21) to the sentence in
(20a) may provide the key to coming up for a solution to this problem.  Most
likely, in the final version of the tree for (20a), we would like to see a
predicative construction, especially since it seems that this type of relation
is at the base meaning of this sentence.  The biggest road blocks are in
deciding what to label the as-adjective-as sequence and whether or not to
display the ellipsis.  

	Before I confuse both you and myself, let's look at another tree, a
tree that might display the next step after the tree for sentence (21).  The
next tree on the attached page (22b) demonstrates a structure for the 
un-ellipsed version of (20a), which is shown in (22) below.

	(22)	Our team is as good as their team is good.

There are many different ways to construct the tree for (22).  First, what do
we call the phrase 'as good as'?  It most likely should not properly be
labelled an adjective, since it's function is clearly more complex.  The phrase
seems to retain some of the conjunction properties of 'as', while at the same
time retaining the properties of the adjective.  Let's attempt to trace the
development of this phrase.  I'm suggesting that it might be possible that the
node Su in tree (21b) becomes the complement of the adjective 'good'.  Since
'good' does not normally take sentential complements on its own, it combines
with the conjunctions to create a monster that can take a sentential
complement.  Once the sentence moves down to be the complement of the
adjective-as-monster, then stating the adjectival predicate a second time
becomes redundant and is therefore ellipsed.  The result is in tree (22c), a
tree one might want to call alphanx0Ax1s2e, a tree based on the present tree
alphanx0Ax1s2, but marked with an 'e' to indicate that ellipsis has taken
place.  We might want to further specialize the name to alphanx0Ax1s2eAx2 to
indicate that it's the second adjectival phrase that is ellipsed.  The question
of what to call the as-adj-as phrase remains open; for now, I have left it
labelled as an adjective.

	So, how do we know that it's the adjectival phrase that's being
ellipsed?  A glance at (20b) shows that we cannot assume that whenever the
index of the as-adj-as phrase is an adjective, it is the adjectival phrase
that's being ellipsed.  The key to the problem lies in what comes after the
as-adj-as sequence.  If the following group of words is a noun phrase, then the
only choice for a tree is the tree in (22c).  Next you may ask, "Well, what
about features?"  Frankly, I just do not know enough about the feature system
to offer an in-depth description of how to handle this situation.  We want the
adjective in the as-as construction and the empty adjective to be coindexed or
related in some way.  However, do we want the ellipsed adjective to be marked
with an epsilon?  What about case and other features?  These are questions I'd
love to be able to answer.  My purpose in offering this preliminary solution is
just that -- to take a first shot at the problem.  I do not claim this would
ever work, but I'm hoping that people who understand these things better than I
do can come up with a working solution.

	There is one other type of ellipsed as-as construction that I have
come across that has an adjective as the index of the multi-word construction.
The sentence in (20b) demonstrates that more than an AP can be ellipsed when an
adjective is the index of the as-as construction.  In these types of sentences,
it seems that an NP and a sentence are being related in an equivalent sense
with respect to the property denoted by the adjective in the as-adj-as
sequence.  In (20b), the report and the speaker's state of mind with respect to
the report are being related in terms of their outlandish-ness.  Again, I might
want to say that the sentence in (20b) results from a wordier sentence, a 
sentence with more words and less complicated syntax, like the sentence in 
(23).

	(23)	His report was not outlandish, as I thought his report would
		be outlandish.  

The tree for (23) is displayed in (23b) on the attached page.  To move from
(23) to the sentence in (20b), there are many grammatical and socially
acceptable stops along the way.  But first let's take a closer look at what is
happening from (23) to (20b).

	As mentioned previously, I would proffer that in moving to the 
syntactically more complex form, the adjective takes the sentence Su as a
complement.  Again, since most adjectives do not generally take sentential
complements, the adjective combines with the conjunction 'as' to create a
creature that can support sentential arguments.  Since the entire complement of
the 'lower' verb 'thought' is repeated information, this material is ripe for
ellipsis.  Now, we begin to run into a rather large problem.  What do we show
as being the ellipsed items?  It will be somewhat elegant to just have an
epsilon S node as the complement of 'thought', and coindex that node with the
Sr node.  However, as is readily apparent in our example, the two S nodes do
not have equivalent subtrees.  In fact, it might even be true that the S nodes
are always equivalent except for the adjoined auxiliary trees -- negatives,
differing auxiliary verbs, other adverbs, etc.  So, how do we handle this
problem?  It does not seem in anyway correct to just show that the S node is
ellipsed.  An example of a tree using this method is in (23c).  We can see that
the way I have drawn the tree prohibits us from coindexing the sentential node,
since the sentential node that includes the 'first' predicative statement
includes the 'second' statement as well.  Let's look at the tree in (23d) to
see if this solution is at all satisfactory.  In (23d), I have expanded the
empty S node to show the 'original' structure of the ellipsed segment.  We
might want to call this tree something like alphanx0Ax1s2es3, where the 'es3'
portion stands for the ellipsis of the sentential complement of the verb in
's2'.  

	We run into the problem of deciding what part of the sentence has been
ellipsed, in fact, we run into this problem again and again.  However, let's
try to make a point with the current example.  If one could somehow just
determine what comes after the as-adj-as sequence, the task might not be that
difficult (although I have no real concept of how difficult these things are).
For example, in the case of (20b), we see that after the as-adj-as creature,
there is an NP and a V that normally takes a sentential complement.  The case
seems straightforward thus far.  However, consider the sentences in (24).

	(24)	a.  His report was not as outlandish as I thought it would be.
		b.  ???His report was not as outlandish as I thought it.
 
(24a) is definitely acceptable, and (24b) is marginally acceptable.  For (24a)
we would have to construct a tree for the cases where the sentence complement
of the as-adj-as contains a verb that takes a sentential complement, and then
the adjectival phrase of the sentential complement is ellipsed.  Would we ever
be able to tell that it's the adjectival phrase that's being ellipsed?  Again,
I really have no concept of the difficulty involved in this matter.  In (24b),
the whole predicative adjectival phrase is ellipsed, similar to (20a).  Also, 
I have made no mention of the feature problem.  Most likely, using the tree in
(23d) as a guide, we would want to coreference NP0 and NP1, and A0 and A1.  

	Before leaving the as-adj-as type constructions, let's take a brief
glance at the tree in (20h).  I would say that there are two separate types of
ellipsis going on here.  The first type would be the kind I described above,
where two NPs are being related in an equivalent sense with respect to the
property denoted by the adjective in the as-adj-as sequence.  The other
ellipsis is the ellipsis that can occur with NPs when the genitive construction
is used twice in similar circumstances within the same discourse segment.  This
second ellipsis seems to be extremely difficult to capture, considering the
fact that usually there are several NPs in the sentence.  Could one rely on the
fact that usually the ellipsed NP is the same as the previous NP that is
preceded by a genitive?  These are issues that I have not thought about, and
presumably someone else has or will.  I am merely saying that examples like
(20h) are doubly difficult in terms of ellipsis.  

	We might also want to ask before leaving the as-adj-as sequences
whether or not any other constituent can squeeze its way in between any of the
parts of the as-adj-as sequence.  In example (20b), we see that when the
adjective is negated, the negation remain outside the as-adj-as construction.
We see that insertion fails is we attempt to use other adverbs -- *is as 
really happy as, *is as very red as, *is as so tired as, etc.  A preliminary
guess would be that nothing can adjoin in between the as-adj-as construction.  
   
	The next two types of as-as constructions, (20c) and (20d), are closely
related to the examples discussed above.  The main difference between those
mentioned above and the examples in (20c) and (20d) is that the ones with
adjectives as indeces are always predicative, while the ones with adverbs as
indeces relate two events.  In (20c), the relation is established by the 
adverb, and the things being related are the same events with different actors.
In (20d), the adverb is relating the action in the first phrase to the actor 
in the second phrase's hopes about the action.  These examples are definitely
more difficult than examples (20a) and (20b).  For example, in (20c), we know
that we are relating two events with different subjects, but which event are we
relating?  Are we ellipsing the verb 'say', 'expect', or 'rise'?  Would it
capture all different types of examples similar to (20c) to say that the lowest
level verb in the first sentence is the event that is being related by the
adverb, and therefore is ellipsed?  The question could be answered if I knew
for sure that adverbs that modify verbs tend to have minimal attachment.  I
would say that usually the adverb is going to be modifying the verb it's
closest to, so we could predict that that verb is the verb that is ellipsed.
However, the sentence in (24) is conceivable.

	(24)	Major shippers say they expect freight rates to rise at least
		as much as the government does.

In (24), the as-as construction is relating two different agent's expecting
actions.  

	Now that we have described the ugliness in its full splendor, let's
assume that we are living in a simple world in terms of examples (20c) and
(20d).  Consider the sentences in (25), which may be semantically equivalent to
(20c) and (20d), but syntactically less complex, lexically more complex.  Trees
for these sentences appear in (25c) and (25d) on the attached page.

	(25)	a.	Major shippers say they expect freight rates to rise
			fast, at least as inflation rises fast.  
		b.	The system was developing rapidly, as they had hoped
			the system was developing rapidly.

As in the adjectival index examples, the second phrase becomes a sentential
complement to the as-adv-as construction (although its part of speech is quite
questionable - both the conjunction and adverb properties seem to remain).
There are a few other questions about this sentence.  In (25a) (and the tree in
25c), would the correct semantically equivalent sentence contain 'fast' in 
'inflation rises fast' or is it just 'inflation rises', meaning, is there 
ellipsis of the whole VP with adverb?  The tree in (25d) displays an example
where the verb in the second phrase subcategorizes for a sentential complement.
In these cases, we would most likely say that the ellipsed sentential
complement is the lowest full S that the adverb is attached to.  Two possible
trees for (20c) and (20d) are shown in (25e) and (25f).  Most likely, we would
want to somehow coindex the ellipsed verb with 'rise' in (25e) and the ellipsed
adverb with 'fast'.  Similarly, we would like to somehow relate the parts of
the ellipsed sentence to the appropriate lowest sentence to which the adverb
was originally attached.  Again, I am leaving many questions unanswered (and 
perhaps many questions un-asked), but I am merely attempting to lay out a good
overview of the problem.  

	In summary, basically one first needs to look at what I call the index
of the as-as construction.  If it's an adjective, then we are dealing with a
predicative situation.  The next thing we look at is what comes after the
as-adj-as constituent.  If it's NP, we can make a pretty good bet that the
ellipsed portion is the adjectival phrase.  If it's an S that contains a verb
that subcategorizes for an S complement, then we know that it's the first
clause that's been ellipsed.  On the other hand, if the index is an adverb,
then we are dealing with a case of verbal modification by a
conjunction-adverb-like constituent.  If what's following the as-as constituent
is an NP, then the lowest verb and the adverb in the as-as constituent are
the things that are ellipsed.  If a sentence containing a verb that 
subcategorizes for an S follows the as-as construction, then the lowest 
sentence the adverb could attach to is the ellipsed portion.  I am asserting 
these points, however the reader is to understand that I am stating this 
summary in light of a limited amount of data.  I am almost certain that more 
complicated examples exist, however, I think this is a good start at a 
characterization of the simpler data.

	There are many other points of interest within this problem area.
First, there are a few other as-adv-as constructions.  For example, 'I'm
finishing up at Penn as rapidly as I can', where we could key in on the fact
there's an adverb index.  We can also recognize that if there's an auxiliary,
then the main verb in the lowest clause the adverb could be attached to is the
verb that is ellipsed along with the adverb.  There are also the sentences in
(20e), (20f), and (20g).  In (20e) we face the problem of, "What on earth is
'possible' anyway?"  In (20f), we see that at times, NPs can come between the
two occurences of 'as'.  These cases probably aren't too much more mysterious
than the cases we have discussed, however I do not have the time to do more
than offer a really brief thought.  The case of (20f) is similar to the
sentence I offered as an example at the top of this paragraph.  If we find that
the as-as construction contains an NP, at least in this case, we can look at
the phrase that comes after the as-as and see that it ends in an auxiliary.
Then, the verb in the lowest clause the as-as phrase attaches to is ellipsed,
its object being the NP trapped between the two occurences of 'as'.  This is
only an explanation specific to (20f), and I just don't have enough of a mind
left to see if it could even possibly be a good generalization.  Cases like
(20g) are really beautiful mysteries.  With (20g), we have a case where the
things that are being ellipsed come after the place where they were ellipsed.
I have no semblance of insight into examples like (20g).  

	There are several spots in Quirk (1985) where these phenomena are
discussed.  Also, I have collected approximately 130 sentences containing as-as
constructions.  These two pieces of information are listed below in (26) and
(27).

	(26)	Quirk (1985) pp. p.360, p.468, Sec.7-74, Sec. 15.71

	(27)	/mnt/linc/xtag/work/heather/as-as/as-commentary

C.  Other Multi-Word Adverbs

	While perusing Quirk (1985) in the adverb section (notably p.445-454),
I noticed that there were several other multi-word adverbs, aside from those 
listed under A. and B. above.  Since I have very little time left in the 
summer, I will merely list the other multi-word adverbs here, and I will posit
what trees the entries would select (However, these tree names look a little
silly.  Perhaps something better could be devised).

	(28)	a.	a bit:		UAdUAda, UAdUAdarb
		b.	a little:	UAdUAda, UAdUAdarb
		c.	sort of:	UAdUAda, UAdUAdarb
		d.	kind of:	UAdUAda, UAdUAdarb
		e.	a little bit:   UAdUAdUAda, UAdUAdUAdarb
		f.	more than:	UAdUAdd, UAdUAda
		g.	less than:	UAdUAdd, UAdUAda
					
	(29)	a.	a bit dull; he is moving a bit fast
		b.	a little extravagant; he is running a little too slowly
		c.	he is sort of clever; he moved sort of quickly
		d.	she is kind of smart; she spoke kind of proudly
		e.	he is a little bit tired; he walks a little bit slowly
		f.	I would be more than happy to help you; more than five
		        people came
		g.	He was less than pleased; less than ten people showed 
			up

There are also three word sequences that end in 'of' and always take a noun
phrase that begins with the determiner 'a':  a bit of a shock, a heck of a good
time, a hell of a good time.  These adverbs modify noun phrases.

III.  		        The 'Not' that Wouldn't Die:
		          Negation of Noun Phrases 

	In English, certain noun phrases can be negated with the negative item
'not'.  The split between those noun phrases that can be negated and those that
cannot does not seem semantically motivated, at least on the surface.  As
Barwise and Cooper (1981) note, "...this distribution cannot be explained
purely in terms of the semantics of quantifiers" (p.197).  They offer the
following contrast as witness to this assertion:

	(1)  Not every man left.
	(2)  Not all men left.
	(3) *Not each man left.
				(B&C, 1981)

In this brief account of the phenomenon, I offer an explanation of the
distribution of 'not', as well as a possible method of implementing
its behavior into the XTAG system.

	To begin our investigation, let's explore the range of examples.  In
(4), there is a list of the types of determiners that, when part of a noun
phrase, allow negation of that noun phrase.  Also in (4), I have listed a few
noun phrases that also allow negation (note that these noun phrases essentially
have incorporated a 'negation-acceptable' determiner).  In (5), I offer a list
of the determiners that do not allow negation of the noun phrase of which they
are a member.  Noun phrases that do not allow negation are also listed in (5).

	(4)  every, all, a, one, many, any, more than n, one of the, all of
	     the, many of the, any of the, everyone, everybody, everything, 
	     anyone, anything, much

	(5)  each, some, the, few, most, several, no, somebody, someone, 
	     something, proper names, cardinals (aside from 'one')

Sentences that exemplify the behavior with 'not' are listed below in (6) and
(7).

	(6)	a.  Not every company expects to report increased earnings. 
		    (WSJ)
		b.  Not all of NASA's space-science work will be so auspicious,
		    though.  (WSJ)
		c.  Not a peso is offered.  (WSJ)
		d.  Not one thing in the house is where it is supposed to be.
		    (WSJ)
		e.  Not many people came to the meeting last week.
		f.  Not any person can just walk right in there and get what
		    they want.
		g.  Not more than half of the team showed up last Friday.
		h.  Not everyone is so pessimistic.  (WSJ)
		i.  Not anyone is allowed in the library - only those with 
		    proper ID.
	
	(7)	a. *Not each company expects to report increased earnings.
		b. *Not some pesos are offered.
		c. *Not most people came to the meeting last week.
		d. *Not several people came to the meeting last week.
	    
It is interesting to note that many of the determiners that are usually grouped
together in terms of semantic behavior (e.g., every/all/each, a/some,
many/most/several), behave quite differently with respect to negation.  

	After much research alone, and intense discussion among the XTAG group,
I have arrived at a generalization that captures an intuition about which NPs
can be negated.  The intuition has to do with the set(s) that the negation of
the noun phrase denotes.  In the case of those noun phrases that can be
negated, the negation of the noun phrase with 'not' is unambiguous in that it
denotes a single defined set.  On the other hand, those noun phrases that
cannot be sensibly negated by 'not' are ambiguous in that there are two
possible sets denoted by the negation of the noun phrase.  I have worked out a
thorough explanation for all of the cases, however I am planning to complete
this discussion at a later date.  I do not have the time now to do the topic
justice.  I have taken extensive notes on this matter, and plan to continue
work on it during the semester.  I also hope to end up with a successful
implementation of my work by the end of the semester.

IV.  Corpus Clean-up

	In addition to the above projects concerning the grammar, I also had a
chance to write a few simple perl scripts to assist in the cleaning of the t3
corpus.  Among the constructions on which I fixed the tags are the multi-word
prepositions, 'at least', nouns missupertagged as verbs, noun phrases mistagged
as a noun-noun compound, relative clauses with 'that', multi-word adverbs on
determiners, and several other small changes.

